## Application for the 2017 Shuttleworth Fellowship

Materials for my application for the Shuttleworth Foundation Fellowship.

About the Fellowship: [https://www.shuttleworthfoundation.org/fellows/](https://www.shuttleworthfoundation.org/fellows/)

In my application I shared my ideas and vision for Democratizing Data Skills - for 
more and broader sets of people to be able to answer the questions that are 
important to them and to society with data. 

[5 minute video](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=g_QTjyIREsY)

### Questions

**Tell us about the world as you see it.**  
*(A description of the status quo and context in which you will be working)*

Our increasing capacity to collect data is changing research and the ways that we can look at the world. There is great potential for discovery and social impact, but we are primarily failing to translate this sea of data into research advances or societal change. This is because it is not software and tools that turn data into knowledge or make discoveries. It is people who turn information into knowledge, and right now there are a limited number of people who know how to work effectively with data. Not only are there few people with these skills and perspectives, but there is little diversity in the group of people with these skills. This limits the types of questions that are being asked and an awareness in the broader community of the types of questions that can be answered with data. Instead of feeling excited about the data that is being generated, most people are either ambivalent or afraid and intimidated by the computational skills they would need to learn and don't know where to start. Access to data and information should be empowering for all, but instead it could create classes of people who can ride the data deluge and those that are drowned by it. As we shift to a data-driven world, it can have the most impact for research and social good if people are empowered to do their own work with data and address the problems they are passionate and knowledgeable about, and that we don't leave this great potential to a privileged few.

**What change do you want to make in the world?**  
*(A description of what you want to change about the status quo, in the world, your personal vision for this area)*

The vision of Data Carpentry and the vision that I share is "building communities teaching universal data literacy" to democratize data skills. The reason I think data literacy is so important is that as we are generating more data in all areas of our lives and environment, there are more opportunities to address important questions in research and society. It also means that data is being used to guide our lives, through policies and algorithms that affect what we see and what we can do. In order to make use of this data to answer diverse and important questions and for people to be able to understand and interpret conclusions and impact of data-driven decisions, we all need to understand better how data is generated and how it is analyzed. I don't think this data literacy comes from a few people teaching everyone else or giving lectures. Instead we must build and support communities that can teach and learn from each other, because communities all have local needs and ways of working, and people teaching and learning from each other can scale and be sustainable. Instead of focusing only on top-down incentives, we can work at the community level to affect cultural change around how we do computational work. We have seen this with the Software and Data Carpentry instructor community. I want to purse this idea that, even in technology work, building training and community together can have an effective and sustained impact.

**What do you believe has prevented this change to date?**  
*(Describe the innovations or questions you would like to explore during the fellowship year)*

This bringing people to data, or giving more people the skills and perspectives needed to work with data has been limited by a few things. One is a lack of information or knowledge. People do not have access to others in their community who are aware of the types of questions that can be asked with data, or they don't have access to data training opportunities. Another is that even when there are training opportunities they're not relevant to that community, so demonstrate less impact, and the training is a one-time engagement provided by outside people, rather than a sustained and community effort. When training is delivered by people perceived as experts, it's not empowering to people that this is something they can do themselves. Rather than focusing on self-efficacy, and creating a lot of people who can do some work with data, we've been approaching data science as creating a few highly trained individuals. We need to shift that model to one of broader access to training and peer-training so that training is relevant and meets people where they are and raises awareness of what work can be done with data to answer the questions that they have. This approach can create communities that support each other with continued learning and can also improve confidence.

**What are you going to do to get there?**  
*(A description of what you actually plan to do during the year)*

We need to bring training to people not for them, but working with them, and building communities that can train and support each other. During the fellowship year I want to focus on how to bring a chapter like model to Data Carpentry, ones that include not only instructors, but also learners. Including both of these groups in chapters promotes continued peer teaching and learning and builds communities of practice and enthusiasm around these topics, a key to sustainability. Local communities or chapters have the advantage of empowering local groups to create structure, programs and ways of working as needed. However, there needs to be some framework for these chapters, so that people are not having to both figure out what to do and do them to get chapters started and maintain them. I want to understand effective models for chapters and what kinds of guidelines, process and pathways should be in place to best create, support and maintain them that also encourage communication within and among groups. There are several groups of different types already working with Data Carpentry who are interested in piloting a chapter idea. I will work with them to understand local needs and pilot approaches adapted from other organizations to develop a chapter-like strategy that we can use to create the opportunity for data training and perspectives to scale through local groups and for people to support each other in their learning and work.

**What challenges or uncertainties do you expect to face?**

A particular challenge will be creating and supporting local communities that are in alignment with what that community needs, while also connecting local communities to the broader global community, for shared learning and perspectives. The key to this will be communication - listening, communicating to others, and creating pathways for people to talk directly with each other. This already has been a significant challenge, as with any approach we take, communication needs to continue to be the helpful, friendly and respectful dialog that is consistent with our community values. It also needs to be open to broad participation and inclusive and not just the conversations of a few who feel most safe in the space. This means we must support both openness in communication with trusted networks. It will be a challenge to create not only this communications strategy, but also to implement it. I have been evaluating different platforms and trust systems, but none are quite right for our needs, so we may need adapt some existing approaches.

**What part does openness play in your idea?**

Openness is key to this project and idea. It's a fundamental value that the idea is based on. All curriculum development is done openly and is openly licensed so that anyone can participate in the development of lessons, but also that anyone can use and revise them. We know that lessons are being used not only in our workshops, but in classrooms and other workshops and for self-guided study. Additionally our instructor training curriculum is open with the hope that we can also share ideas about best practices in teaching computational and data skills. Finally, we value openness as a community. We want to share knowledge and approaches with each other and set that as a community norm within our organization. As we work openly, we also hope it sets a standard for the hundreds of volunteers who work with us and thousands of people who go through our workshops that this is how computational work is done.
